a major development and breaking right
now in Gaza the Palestinian Health
Ministry 700 p.m. in Gaza City October
17th
2023 reports surface of a devastating
explosion at one of gaza's oldest
[Music]
hospitals it was not the first time a
hospital was attacked but this was
different the worst single Mass killing
of Palestinians in the Israel Gaza War
so far chaos and horror at the scene
much of the building has been destroyed
the Israeli military had been conducting
bombing raids on Gaza City that night
early news reports pointed the blame at
Israel but within hours a
counternarrative
emerged who hit the hospital is in
dispute the Israel Defense Forces say it
was an errant missile fired by the
militant group Islamic Jihad in Gaza
immediately it was contested whether
Israel had been the source of the
particular munition that had created a
crater right outside the hospital also
disputed was how many were dead or
injured so immediately you have this
tension around whether a hospital which
is supposed to be protected under
International humanitarian law had in
fact become a target of Israel Israel
pushed back against that and said it was
a failed rocket it was at night so there
wasn't a lot of video and as these
claims kind of circulated the headlines
kind of adjusted and became more vague
to accommodate the uncertainty the
stories that came out subsequently were
looking at ways to figure out okay how
can we get close to knowing who was
responsible for
this what really happened at why did
media Outlets come to such different
conclusions to answer those questions
you have to understand the strengths and
the shortcomings of what is known as ENT
open-source
[Music]
intelligence in a moment of conflict or
catastrophe the video and photos
captured by eyewitnesses often contain
valuable clues or indicators these
publicly available or open sources of
information can then be used by
investigators to make sense of what can
otherwise seem
chaotic when you take that material and
compare it with satellite imagery the
geographical landmarks can help you
figure out where a place is a practice
known as
geolocation these methods have made it
much easier for journalists and citizens
to assess whether something is true or
not to see things from a different
vantage point but while osen appears
scientific and fact-based it is just as
open to the same biases and assumptions
that any reporting
[Music]
is trust CNN a few years back because of
the rock war and the financial crisis
you had a lot of distrust of the media
smartphones created this whole
opportunity that everybody was a
potential witness what it needed was
somebody to process it somebody to
analyze it and turn it into some kind of
a coherent narrative or a story open
source investigators started filling
that Gap you suddenly have people able
to challenge mainstream media by having
access to a global audience on their own
the original idea of Open Source
investigation is that it would be a very
democratizing force that people who were
closest to sites of conflict moments of
Crisis could get their perspectives out
to the public in ways that could be
quite powerful for journalism for war
crimes investigation I think we're kind
of entering into a sort of golden age
because we're seeing newsrooms across
the world Embrace open source analysis
Belling cat did the mh17 investigation
which revealed that you know it was
Russian back separatists that shot down
the ainer above Ukraine we've seen these
kinds of really powerful reports that
have held powerful actors to account
like BBC Africa I when they did their
anatomy of a killing
investigation putting all this evidence
together we can say with certainty that
the killings took place
here or the New York Times with their
radio intercepts on Russian air strikes
in Syria
[Music]
these coordinates aren't for a military
Target they pointed this underground
Hospital one of the things that happened
with ENT was that it became a threat to
States it's a form of counter forensics
in a sense because forensic capabilities
in the past they used to be in the hands
of States now states which in the past
used to protect their misdeed through
secrecy and through officiation or just
denying access so they themselves became
the targets of analysis and one of the
ways that they are trying to counter
that is they have hijacked its aesthetic
to sow their own disinformation and to
sow their own counternarratives the
trajectory analysis from the barriage of
rockets confirms that the Rockets were
fired close proximity to the
hospital the idea that Israel was not
responsible for Al Ali first emerged
online from an IST osen accounts the
claim rested on one video an Al jazer
live stream which showed a midair
explosion the morning after Israeli
military spokesperson Peter Lerner went
on the BBC with his own open- source
presentation referencing the video El
jazer broadcasted it last night they
were broadcasting it live and this is
the rocket that that you see actually
impacts falls out of the sky and impacts
into Gaza that was a line that the idea
F pushed during interviews with various
media Outlets they said look you can see
the failed rocket here in the sky and
then it crashes and hits the hospital it
turns out New York Times was able to do
an investigation and they figured out
that this supposed errant rocket was
actually originated within Israel it
came from an Iron Dome Interceptor
site using these three cameras some of
them from Israel that were live streams
or CCTV footage we can see that this
rocket originated in Israel by this time
the theory
had had spread major organizations
including Wall Street Journal CNN and
others published analysis of what
happened they said very definitively
that that rocket is the cause of this
attack tonight a new scene and forensic
analysis confirms that the deadly blast
at the hospital complex in Gaza did not
come from Israel so many people had put
their
reputations into supporting a certain
assumption that it became harder for
them to climb down so that assumption
since then has remained even though
every aspect of the factual basis of it
was was completely undermined by the New
York Times by Al jazer and by forensic
architecture the trajectory shows the
missile was launched from outside Gaza
near to a known Israeli Iron Dome
site and the result of that was that
since then the media coverage has
skirted around the issue of assigning
responsibility anytime some major
atrocity
occurs was an examp example of the power
and limitations of open- source
investigations it showed how events
surrounding an atrocity are so often
open to subjective interpretation how
ENT can be used for all sorts of ends
including by States pushing their own
narratives and it showed that
open-source reporting cannot replace the
fundamentals of Journalism being on the
ground talking to people and collecting
evidence the reality of course though is
that the open- source investigation has
also been weapon ized by a number of
organizations and individuals who really
want to push a particular narrative this
is the shifa hospital at a first glance
it looks like a regular Hospital right
but inside and beneath it lurks a much
darker secret we've seen Israel put out
its own digital open- Source
investigations using very similar visual
signatures to push their own
interpretation of things that have
happened what we're seeing now with
newsrooms adopting open Source tools and
combining that with the shoe leather
journalism the interviews with people on
the ground I think it's creating more
powerful stories than what we would just
get with a simple open source analysis I
think that's still important but I think
when you combine it with these
interviews and on the ground stories of
people that are actually victims or
actually affected by these incidents
you're going to get a more powerful
story that is more impactful for people
open source investigators I do think
have grown increasingly confident about
what they're able to determine based on
finding information online but where I
do think we're Landing today is an
understanding that it's allsource
investigations that are the most
powerful so I do think the future is
really going to be about bringing
together people with those traditional
fact finding skills with people who have
a deep understanding of how information
flows on the internet where the
opportunities are where the challenges
lie and how to counteract those
challenges so that together we can tell
a more complete story than we ever had
before thanks for watching now hit that
like button and leave us a comment to
let us know what you think about
anything that we covered this week don't
forget to follow us on Twitter does
anyone really call it x Facebook and
Instagram for updates from the show
links are in the description